MASSIMAL: A multimodal dataset for coastal habitat mapping in Norway

The MASSIMAL dataset was collected as part of the "MASSIMAL" project (Mapping of Algae
and Seagrass using Spectral Imaging and Machine Learning). The main goal of the project
was development methods for shallow-water coastal habitat mapping based on hyperspectral
imaging. The most important part of the dataset is approximately 900 hyperspectral
images collected using a UAV (unmanned aerial vehicle, or "drone") at 4 different
locations along the Norwegian coast. The dataset also includes multiple other types of
data; multispectral and RGB images collected from UAVs, sonar data, and underwater
images of the seabed. Some of the hyperspectral images have been annotated to enable
training of machine learning models, and the annotations are included in the dataset.  

The project was conducted in the period 2020-2024, and data collection and field work
was performed at various locations along the Norwegian coast in the period 2021-2023.
The project was financed by the Norwegian Research Council (8 MNOK) and by UiT the
Arctic University of Norway (600 kNOK), and was a collaboration between UiT the Arctic
University of Norway, Norwegian Institute for Water Research and Nord
University. 

The dataset is organized as a set of ZIP archive files, where each ZIP file corresponds
to a single set of data collected at a specific time and location. The ZIP files follow
the naming pattern

    massimal_<area>_<location>_<datetime[optional tag]>_<data type>.zip

An example could be

    massimal_vega_sola_202208231608-coast3_hsi.zip

This dataset was collected in the Vega area, close the the small island of Søla, on the
date 2022-08-23, at time 16:08. The dataset also has the additional tag "coast3". The
dataset contains hyperspectral images (HSI).

The dataset was collected during field campaigns in four areas along the Norwegian
coast; close to Bodø (67.2N, 15.0E), Larvik (59.0N, 10.1E), Smøla (63.4N, 7.8E) and Vega
(65.7N, 11.7E). These areas were chosen to represent multiple habitats of interest (e.g.
seagrass meadows, kelp forests, maerl beds) and to span large variations in environmental
parameters (e.g. wave exposure and water temperature). Multiple smaller locations were
covered within each main area. 

The following "modes" of data are included in the dataset:
- hsi: Hyperspectral images collected with UAV
- msi: Multispectral images collected with UAV
- rgb: Color images (red, green, blue) collected with UAV
- usv: Underwater images and sonar data collected using a unmanned surface vehicle (USV)
- boat: Underwater images and/or written observations collected from a boat
- snorkel: Underwater images collected while snorkeling in the water surface
- rov: Underwater images collected using an ROV (remotely operated vehicle)
- walk: Images from the intertidal zone collected while walking
- annotation: Annotations of hyperspectral images (class "masks" for semantic
segmentation) 

The names used above are the same that are used in the zip file names.

Hyperspectral imaging was performed using an "Airborne Remote Sensing System"
manufactured by Resonon. The system included a Pika-L hyperspectral camera, an IMU
measuring camera position and orientation, and a spectrometer measuring downwelling
irradiance. A DJI MAtrice 600 Pro (UAV/drone) with a DJI Ronin-MX 3-axis gimbal was used
as the camera platform. The hyperspectral camera has 300 spectral channels covering the
a spectral range of 400-1000 nm. The camera is a push-broom sensor with 900 spatial
pixels and 36.5 degrees field of view. The camera frame rate and the UAV altitude and
speed were set to yield a ground sampling distance of approximately 3.5 cm, both along-
and across-track. 

The hyperspectral images are saved in the "ENVI" file format, with a large binary file
containing the image pixel values and a small "header" file containing metadata. The
images have all been post-processed and converted to units of spectral radiance, and the
metadata contains map information for georeferencing each image. Where available, the
metadata also contains measurements of spectral downwelling irradiance, which enables
conversion of radiance values into reflectance. 

Further details about the imaging system and data format are available in the readme.md
file included with each dataset.  
